README.md, before:

# to_spreadsheet [![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/glebm/to_spreadsheet.png?branch=master)](http://travis-ci.org/glebm/to_spreadsheet)

to_spreadsheet lets your Rails 3+ app render Excel files using the existing slim/haml/erb/etc views.

Installation
------------

Add it to your Gemfile:
```ruby
gem 'to_spreadsheet'
```

Usage
-----

In the controller:
```ruby
# my_thingies_controller.rb
class MyThingiesController < ApplicationController
  respond_to :xls, :html
  def index
    @my_items = MyItem.all
    respond_to do |format|
      format.html 
      format.xlsx { render xlsx: :index, filename: "my_items_doc" }
    end
  end
end
```

In the view partial:
```haml
# _my_items.haml
%table
  %caption My items
  %thead
    %tr
      %td ID
      %td Name
  %tbody
    - my_items.each do |my_item|
      %tr
        %td.number= my_item.id
        %td= my_item.name
  %tfoot
    %tr
      %td(colspan="2") #{my_items.length}
```

In the XLSX view:
```haml
# index.xls.haml
= render 'my_items', my_items: @my_items
```

In the HTML view:
```haml
# index.html.haml
= link_to 'Download spreadsheet', my_items_url(format: :xlsx)
= render 'my_items', my_items: @my_items
```

### Worksheets

Every table in the view will be converted to a separate sheet.
The sheet title will be assigned to the value of the table’s caption element if it exists.

### Formatting

You can define formats in your view file (local to the view) or in the initializer

```ruby
format_xls 'table.my-table' do
  workbook use_autowidth: true
  sheet    orientation: landscape
  format 'th', b: true # bold
  format 'tbody tr', bg_color: lambda { |row| 'ddffdd' if row.index.odd? }
  format 'A3:B10', i: true # italic
  format column: 0, width: 35
  format 'td.custom', lambda { |cell| modify cell somehow.}
  # default value (fallback value when value is blank or 0 for integer / float)
  default 'td.price', 10
end
```

For the full list of supported properties head here: http://rubydoc.info/github/randym/axlsx/Axlsx/Styles#add_style-instance_method
In addition, for column formats, Axlsx columnInfo properties are also supported

### Advanced formatting

to_spreadsheet [associates](https://github.com/glebm/to_spreadsheet/blob/master/lib/to_spreadsheet/renderer.rb#L33) HTML nodes with Axlsx objects as follows:

| HTML tag | Axlsx object |
|----------|--------------|
| table    | worksheet    |
| tr       | row          |
| td, th   | cell         |

For example, to directly manipulate a worksheet:
```ruby
format_xls do
  format 'table' do |worksheet|
    worksheet.add_chart ...
    # to get the associated Nokogiri node:
    el = context.to_xml_node(worksheet)
  end
end
```

### Themes

You can define themes, i.e. blocks of formatting code:
```ruby
ToSpreadsheet.theme :zebra do
  format 'tr', bg_color: lambda { |row| 'ddffdd' if row.index.odd? }
end
```

And then use them:
```ruby
format_xls 'table.zebra', ToSpreadsheet.theme(:zebra)
```

### Types

The default theme uses class names on td/th to cast values.
Here is the list of class to type mapping:

| CSS class        | Format                   |
|------------------|--------------------------|
| decimal or float | Decimal                  |
| num or int       | Integer                  |
| datetime         | DateTime (Chronic.parse) |
| date             | Date (Date.parse)        |
| time             | Time (Chronic.parse)     |

Commit message:

Add config.to_spreadsheet.renderer option. Fixes #21

README.md, after:

# to_spreadsheet [![Build Status](https://secure.travis-ci.org/glebm/to_spreadsheet.png?branch=master)](http://travis-ci.org/glebm/to_spreadsheet)

to_spreadsheet lets your Rails 3+ app render Excel files using the existing slim/haml/erb/etc views.

Installation
------------

Add it to your Gemfile:
```ruby
gem 'to_spreadsheet'
```

Usage
-----

In the controller:
```ruby
# my_thingies_controller.rb
class MyThingiesController < ApplicationController
  respond_to :xls, :html
  def index
    @my_items = MyItem.all
    respond_to do |format|
      format.html
      format.xlsx { render xlsx: :index, filename: "my_items_doc" }
    end
  end
end
```

In the view partial:
```haml
# _my_items.haml
%table
  %caption My items
  %thead
    %tr
      %td ID
      %td Name
  %tbody
    - my_items.each do |my_item|
      %tr
        %td.number= my_item.id
        %td= my_item.name
  %tfoot
    %tr
      %td(colspan="2") #{my_items.length}
```

In the XLSX view:
```haml
# index.xls.haml
= render 'my_items', my_items: @my_items
```

In the HTML view:
```haml
# index.html.haml
= link_to 'Download spreadsheet', my_items_url(format: :xlsx)
= render 'my_items', my_items: @my_items
```

### Worksheets

Every table in the view will be converted to a separate sheet.
The sheet title will be assigned to the value of the table’s caption element if it exists.

### Formatting

You can define formats in your view file (local to the view) or in the initializer

```ruby
format_xls 'table.my-table' do
  workbook use_autowidth: true
  sheet    orientation: landscape
  format 'th', b: true # bold
  format 'tbody tr', bg_color: lambda { |row| 'ddffdd' if row.index.odd? }
  format 'A3:B10', i: true # italic
  format column: 0, width: 35
  format 'td.custom', lambda { |cell| modify cell somehow.}
  # default value (fallback value when value is blank or 0 for integer / float)
  default 'td.price', 10
end
```

For the full list of supported properties head here: http://rubydoc.info/github/randym/axlsx/Axlsx/Styles#add_style-instance_method
In addition, for column formats, Axlsx columnInfo properties are also supported

### Advanced formatting

to_spreadsheet [associates](https://github.com/glebm/to_spreadsheet/blob/master/lib/to_spreadsheet/renderer.rb#L33) HTML nodes with Axlsx objects as follows:

| HTML tag | Axlsx object |
|----------|--------------|
| table    | worksheet    |
| tr       | row          |
| td, th   | cell         |

For example, to directly manipulate a worksheet:
```ruby
format_xls do
  format 'table' do |worksheet|
    worksheet.add_chart ...
    # to get the associated Nokogiri node:
    el = context.to_xml_node(worksheet)
  end
end
```

### Themes

You can define themes, i.e. blocks of formatting code:
```ruby
ToSpreadsheet.theme :zebra do
  format 'tr', bg_color: lambda { |row| 'ddffdd' if row.index.odd? }
end
```

And then use them:
```ruby
format_xls 'table.zebra', ToSpreadsheet.theme(:zebra)
```

### Using along side axlsx-rails
If you are using [axlsx-rails](https://github.com/straydogstudio/axlsx_rails), :xlsx renderer might have already been defined. In that case define a custome renderer using
```ruby
# app/config/application.rb
config.to_spreadsheet.renderer = :html2xlsx
```

And then in controller
```ruby
respond_to do |format|
  format.html2xlsx
end
```

### Types

The default theme uses class names on td/th to cast values.
Here is the list of class to type mapping:

| CSS class        | Format                   |
|------------------|--------------------------|
| decimal or float | Decimal                  |
| num or int       | Integer                  |
| datetime         | DateTime (Chronic.parse) |
| date             | Date (Date.parse)        |
| time             | Time (Chronic.parse)     |
